docs: rfc-0241 tari-monero atomic swap (#3623)
tari-project/tari: RFC/src/RFC-0241_AtomicSwapXMR.md

"NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY" and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as
shown here.

## Disclaimer

This document and its content are intended for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community of the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This Request for Comment (RFC) aims to describe how an Atomic swap between Tari and Monero will be created.

## Related Requests for Comment

* [RFC-0201: TariScript](RFC-0201_TariScript.md)
* [RFC-0202: TariScript Opcodes](RFC-0202_TariScriptOpcodes.md)

$$
\newcommand{\script}{\alpha} % utxo script
\newcommand{\input}{ \theta }
\newcommand{\cat}{\Vert}
\newcommand{\so}{\gamma} % script offset
\newcommand{\hash}[1]{\mathrm{H}\bigl({#1}\bigr)}
$$

## Description

> Doing atomic swaps with Monero is more complicated and requires a crypto dance to complete as Monero does not

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Doing atomic swaps with Monero is more complicated and requires a cryptographic dance to complete as Monero does not
```

implement any form of HTLC's or the like. This means that when doing an atomic swap with Monero, most of the logic will
have to be implemented on the Tari side. Atomic swaps between Monero and bitcoin have been implemented by the [Farcaster  project](https://github.com/farcaster-project/RFCs)

> and the [commit team](https://github.com/comit-network/xmr-btc-swap). Due to the way that TariScript works, we have a few advantages over the bitcoin script when it comes to [adaptor signatures](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts#adaptor-signatures) as the [script key] was specifically designed with [scriptless scripts](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts) in mind.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the [comit team](https://github.com/comit-network/xmr-btc-swap). Due to the way that TariScript works, we have a few advantages over the bitcoin script when it comes to [adaptor signatures](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts#adaptor-signatures) as the [script key] was specifically designed with [scriptless scripts](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts) in mind.
```

### Method

> The primary, happy outline of a Tari - Monero atomic swap is described here, and more detail will follow. We will assume here that Alice wants to trade her XTR for Bob's XMR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary, happy path outline of a Tari - Monero atomic swap is described here, and more detail will follow. We will assume here that Alice wants to trade her XTR for Bob's XMR.
```

> * Negotiation - Here, both parties negotiate about the values and how the Monero and Tari Utxo's will look

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Negotiation - Here, both parties negotiate about the values and how the Monero and Tari UTXO's will look
```

Bob to claim the Tari. This transaction is also completed and signed before the first Tari UTXO is published. This transaction
will reveal Bob's Monero key so that if Alice reappears, she can claim the Monero. 

![swap flow](assets/TXR_XMR_flow.png)

### TariScript

The Script used for the Tari UTXO is as follows:
``` TariScript,ignore
   CheckHeight(height_1)
   LtZero
   IFTHEN
      PushPubkey(K_{Ss})
   Else
      CheckHeight(height_2)
      LtZero
      IFTHEN
         PushPubkey(K_{Sr})
      Else
         PushPubkey(K_{Sl})
      ENDIF
   ENDIF
```

Here `height_1` is the lock height till Alice can claim the transaction. If Alice fails to publish the refund transaction
after `height_2,` Bob can claim the lapse transaction.

### Negotiation

Alice and Bob have to negotiate about the exchange rate and the amount to be exchanged in the atomic swap. 
They also need to decide how the two UTXO's will look on the blockchain. To accomplish this, the following needs to be finalized:

* Amount of Tari to swap for the amount of Monero
* Monero public key parts \\(X_a\\), \\(X_b\\) and its aggregate form \\(X\\)

> * Tari [script key] parts \\(K_{Ssa}\\), \\(K_{Ssb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Ss}\\)

Reviewer: You use the subscripts s,r and l here but nowhere do you really describe what they are in the description you just gave. Sort of assuming it spend, refund and lapse but right here you can make it clear

* Tari [script key] parts \\(K_{Sra}\\), \\(K_{Srb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Sr}\\)
* Tari [script key] parts \\(K_{Sla}\\), \\(K_{Slb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Sl}\\)
* Tari [sender offset key] parts  \\(K_{Osa}\\), \\(K_{Osb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Os}\\)
* Tari [sender offset key] parts  \\(K_{Ora}\\), \\(K_{Orb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Or}\\)
* Tari [sender offset key] parts  \\(K_{Ola}\\), \\(K_{Olb}\\) and its aggregate form \\(K_{Ol}\\)
* All of the nonces used in the script signature creation and Metadata signature for the swap, refund, and lapse transactions
* The [script offset] used in both the swap, refund, and lapse transactions
* The [TariScript] to be used in the Tari UTXO
* The blinding factor \\(k_i\\) for the Tari UTXO, this can be a Diffie-Hellman between their addresses.

### Key construction

Using multi-signatures with Schnorr signatures, we need to ensure that the keys are constructed so that key

> cancellation attacks are not possible. To do this, we follow the Musig way of creating keys. 

Reviewer: Link to the Musig article on TLU

b_{Slb} &= r_{Slb_b} + x_b + e_l(k_{Slb} + k_i) \\\\
e_l &= \hash{ (R_{Sl} + (X_b)) \cat \alpha_i \cat \input_i \cat (K_{Sla} + K_{Slb}) \cat C_i} \\\\
a_{Sl} &= a_{Sla} + a_{Slb} \\\\
b_{Sl} &= b_{Sla} + b_{Slb} \\\\
R_{Sl} &= r_{Slb_a} \cdot H + r_{Slb_b} \cdot G + R_{Sla}\\\\
a_{Mlb} &= r_{Mlb_a} + e(v_{l}) \\\\
b_{Mlb} &= r_{Mlb_b} + e(k\_{Olb}+k_l) \\\\
R_{Mlb} &= a_{Mlb} \cdot H + b_{Mlb} \cdot G \\\\
e &= \hash{ (R_{Mla} + R_{Mlb}) \cat \script_l \cat F_l \cat (K_{Ola} + K_{Olb}) \cat C_l} \\\\
R_{Ml} &= R_{Mla} + R_{Mlb} \\\\
\so_{lb} &= k_{Slb} - k_{Olb} \\\\
\so_{r} &= \so_{la} +\so_{lb} \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{20}
$$

This allows Bob to claim the Tari he originally wanted, but it also exposes his Monero key \\(x_b\\)
This means if Alice ever comes back online, she can calculate \\(X\\) and claim the Monero she wanted all along using:
$$
\begin{aligned}
b_{Sl} &= b_{Slb} + b_{Slb} \\\\
b_{Sl} - b_{Slb} &= b_{Slb} \\\\
b_{Slb} &= r_{Slb_b} + x_a + e_r(k_{Slb} + k_i) \\\\
b_{Slb} - b_{Slb}' &= r_{Slb_b} + x_b + e_r(k_{Slb} + k_i) -(r_{Slb_b} +  e_r(k_{Slb}+k_i))\\\\
b_{Slb} - b_{Slb}' &= x_b \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{21}
$$

## Alternative approach

> ### Alternative approach Description

Reviewer: Repetition from the merge, cut this section

Doing atomic swaps with Monero is more complicated and requires a crypto dance to complete as Monero does not
implement any form of HTLC's or the like. This means that when doing an atomic swap with Monero, most of the logic will
have to be implemented on the Tari side. Atomic swaps between Monero and bitcoin have been implemented by the [Farcaster  project](https://github.com/farcaster-project/RFCs)
and the [commit team](https://github.com/comit-network/xmr-btc-swap).

> ### Alternative approach Method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Alternative approach method
```

> The primary, happy outline of a Tari - Monero atomic swap is described here, and more detail will follow. We will assume here that Alice wants to trade her XTR for Bob's XMR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The primary, happy path outline of a Tari - Monero atomic swap is described here, and more detail will follow. We will assume here that Alice wants to trade her XTR for Bob's XMR.
```

of the Monero aggregate key used to lock the Monero UTXO. The script can end one of three ways, one for the happy path if
Alice gives Bob the pre_image after she checked and verified the Monero UTXO, one for her to reclaim her Tari amount if Bob
disappears or tries to break the contract. And lastly, one for Bob to claim the Tari if Alice disappears after he publishes the
Monero UTXO.

### Alternative approach TariScript

The Script used for the Tari UTXO is as follows:
``` TariScript,ignore
   CheckHeight(height_1)
   LtZero
   IFTHEN
      HashSha256 
      PushHash(HASH256{pre_image})
      EqualVerify
      Ristretto
      PushPubkey(X_b)
      EqualVerify
      PushPubkey(K_{Sb})
   Else
      CheckHeight(height_2)
      LtZero
      IFTHEN
         Ristretto
         PushPubkey(X_a)
         EqualVerify
         PushPubkey(K_{Sa})
      Else
         Ristretto
         PushPubkey(X_b)
         EqualVerify
         PushPubkey(K_{Sb})
      ENDIF
   ENDIF
```

Here `height_1` is the lock height till Alice can claim the transaction. If Alice fails to publish the refund transaction
after `height_2,` Bob can claim the lapse transaction.

> ### Alternative approach Negotiation

Reviewer: All these titles are weird in terms of capitalization. Remove the `Alternative Approach part of all these headings. The section heading is clear

| Monero key                  | \\( X \\)             | Alice's partial  Monero public key  on Ristretto |
| Alice's Monero key          | \\( X_a \\)           | Alice's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto |
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( X_b \\)           | Bob's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto   |
| Monero key                  | \\( Xm \\)            | Alice's partial  Monero public key  on ed25519 |
| Alice's Monero key          | \\( Xm_a \\)          | Alice's partial  Monero public key on ed25519 |
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( Xm_b \\)          | Bob's partial  Monero public key on ed25519   |
| Script key                  | \\( K_s \\)           | The [script key] of the utxo |
| Alice's Script key          | \\( K_sa \\)          | Alice's partial [script key]  |
| Bob's Script key            | \\( K_sb \\)          | Bob's partial [script key]  |
| Alice's adaptor signature   | \\( b'_{Sa} \\)       | Alice's adaptor signature for the signature \\( b_{Sa} \\) of the script_signature of the utxo |
| Bob's adaptor signature     | \\( b'_{Sb} \\)       | Bob's adaptor signature for the \\( b_{Sb} \\) of the script_signature of the utxo |

> | Alice's ZK tari proof       | \\(R_{ZTa}, s_{ZTa})  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Alice's key \\(x_a) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Alice's ZK tari proof       | \\(R_{ZTa}, s_{ZTa} \\)  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Alice's key \\(x_a) |
```

> | Bob's ZK tari proof         | \\(R_{ZTb}, s_{ZTb})  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Bob's key \\(x_b) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bob's ZK tari proof         | \\(R_{ZTb}, s_{ZTb} \\)  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Bob's key \\(x_b) |
```

> | Alice's ZK monero proof     | \\(R_{ZMa}, s_{ZMa})  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Alice's key \\(xm_a) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Alice's ZK monero proof     | \\(R_{ZMa}, s_{ZMa} \\)  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Alice's key \\(xm_a) |
```

> | Bob's ZK monero proof       | \\(R_{ZMb}, s_{ZMb})  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Bob's key \\(xm_b) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bob's ZK monero proof       | \\(R_{ZMb}, s_{ZMb} \\)  | Zero knowledge proof signature for Bob's key \\(xm_b) |
```

own. Bob requires a pre-image from Alice to complete the swap transaction; Alice needs to verify that Bob published the 
Monero transaction and that everything is complete as they have agreed. If she is happy, she will provide Bob with the 
pre-image to immediately claim the Tari UTXO.

### TariScript

The Script used for the Tari UTXO is as follows:
``` TariScript,ignore
   Ed25519Point
   CheckHeight(height_1)
   LtZero
   IFTHEN
      PushPubkey(Xm_b)
      EqualVerify
      HashSha256 
      PushHash(HASH256{pre_image})
      EqualVerify
      PushPubkey(K_{Sb})
   Else
      CheckHeight(height_2)
      LtZero
      IFTHEN
         PushPubkey(Xm_a)
         EqualVerify
         PushPubkey(K_{Sa})
      Else
         PushPubkey(Xm_b)
         EqualVerify
         PushPubkey(K_{Sb})
      ENDIF
   ENDIF
```

Before `height_1`, Bob can claim the Tari UTXO by supplying `pre_image` and his private Monero key part `x_b`. After 
`height_1` but before `height_2`, Alice can claim the Tari UTXO by supplying her private Monero key part `x_a`. After 
`height_2`, Bob can claim the Tari UTXO by supplying his private Monero key part `x_b`.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need a short discussion about choosing safe values for `height_1` and `height_2`.

Author: That's an implementation detail I don't think we need in here. But I am open to what the values can be. I have not personally put any thought in the actual heights apart from height_1 should be bigger than height_2.

In the XTR-BTC swap demo, I used a day for the height.  But there was no actual reasoning behind choosing that specific value.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like:

_The first lock height `height_1` should give ample time for (a) Alice to post the Tari UTXO transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations, (b) for Bob to post the Monero transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations, (c) for Alice to give the pre-image to Bob and for him to post the swap transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations. The second lock height `height_2` should give ample time for Alice after  `height_1` to re-claim her Tari._

_As a guideline, a "quick" atomic swap could be 6 hours for `height_1` and 12 hours for `height_2`, whereas a "conservative" time frame could be 24 hours and 48 hours respectively._

### Negotiation

Alice and Bob have to negotiate the exchange rate and the amount exchanged in the atomic swap. They also need to decide 
how the two UTXO's will look on the blockchain. To accomplish this, the following needs to be finalized:

* Amount of Tari to swap for the amount of Monero
* Monero public key parts \\(X_a\\), \\(X_b\\) and its aggregate form \\(X\\)
* Tari [script key] parts \\(K_{Sa}\\), \\(K_{Sb}\\) 
* The [TariScript] to be used in the Tari UTXO
* The blinding factor \\(k_i\\) for the Tari UTXO, which can be a Diffie-Hellman between their addresses.

### Key selection

Using (1), we create the Monero keys as they are multi-party aggregate keys.
The Monero key parts for Alice and Bob is constructed as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
X_a' &= x_a' \cdot M \\\\
X_b' &= x_b' \cdot M \\\\
x_a &=  \hash{\hash{X_a' \cat X_b'} \cat X_a' } * x_a' \\\\
x_b &=  \hash{\hash{X_a' \cat X_b'} \cat X_b' } * x_b' \\\\
x &= x_a + x_b \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{2}
$$

### Commitment phase

This phase allows Alice and Bob to commit to using their keys and requires more than one round to complete.

> Some of the information that needs to be committed to depends on previous knowledge. 

Reviewer 2: I think we need to add a sub-heading or paragraph here detailing _Starting values_, similar to that in Method 2.

Author: I disagree here, there are only starting values and the only reason we have a formula section is to ensure clarity that the keys exchanged here are on curve Ed25519 and not Ristretto.

Reviewer 2: I think it is unclear to the first time reader what those values are, or for myself when I have to read it a month from now - "_depends on previous knowledge_" could be explicit.

Author: I changed the text somewhat here, to be more explicit.

can learn Bob's secret Monero key. Although this private key is now public knowledge, her part of the Monero spend key 
is still private, and thus only she knows the complete Monero spend key. She can use this knowledge to claim the Monero 
UTXO.

### The refund

If something goes wrong and Bob never publishes the Monero, or he disappears, Alice needs to wait for the lock height
`height_1` to pass. This will allow her to reclaim her Tari, but in doing so, she needs to publish her Monero secret key 
as input to the script to unlock the Tari. When Bob comes back online, he can use this public knowledge to reclaim his 
Monero as only he now knows both parts of the Monero UTXO spend key.

### The lapse transaction

If something goes wrong and Alice never gives Bob the requird `pre_image`, Bob needs to wait for the lock height
`height_2` to pass. This will allow him to claim the Tari he wanted all along, but in doing so, he needs to publish
his Monero secret key as input to the script to unlock the Tari. When Alice comes back online, she can use this public 
knowledge to claim the Monero she wanted all along as only she now knows both parts of the Monero UTXO spend key.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need to add a section here to the like of **Script security** that discusses the security aspects of revealing half the Monero private key and why that is not a security risk, with some informed/original references to back it up. 

Then we can forward reference this section in all parts where Alice or Bob must reveal half their Monero private key to the public.

Author: I don't quite feel that we can go deep enough for it to be worth it. To properly explain why this is secure we need to explain ECC. And that's not something that we should do here. 

If I just add a section that mentions this, will it be enough for you:
" Because of the way Elliptic Curve Cryptography works we know that we can add two secret keys together, and share the public version of both. And at the same time, we know that neither party can calculate the total secret key with just one part. "

Reviewer 2: That could work, but I think we would still need some informed/original references to back it up.

Author: Added, do you have a good reference that explains this?

Reviewer 2: Let me try to hunt something down.

Reviewer 2: I still think this issue will be in people's minds thus it warrants a separate section, and not just added into a paragraph as a type of afterthought.

Maybe something like this:

_**Script security**_
_The risk of any of our two parties sharing half the Monero private key with their counterparty is similar to the 
security of the Elliptic-Curve Cryptography scheme 
[as summarized here](https://cryptobook.nakov.com/asymmetric-key-ciphers/elliptic-curve-cryptography-ecc#private-key-public-key-and-the-generator-point-in-ecc). 
Considering (2) and (3) we have:

```
  (x_a + x_b) . M = x_a . M + x_b . M     (5)
                  = Xm_a + Xm_b
    with
  unknown: x_a
  known:   x_b, (x_a + x_b) . M, Xm_a, Xm_b
```
We can therfore be led to believe that (6) is feasible (by looking at this trivially):
```
  (x_a + x_b) . M = Xm_a + Xm_b
    thus
  x_a . M = (Xm_a + Xm_b - x_b . M)       (6)
          = Xm_a
```
However, the operation `Xm_a / M` does not exist for ECC and solving for `x_a` by brute force here is exactly equivalent 
to solving the 
[Elliptic-Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem (ECDLP)](https://cryptobook.nakov.com/asymmetric-key-ciphers/elliptic-curve-cryptography-ecc#elliptic-curve-discrete-logarithm-problem-ecdlp), 
which have been shown to have no efficient solution for carefully chosen finite fields and elliptic curves.

## Method 2

### Detail

This method uses adapter signatures and multi-party commitment signatures to ensure that the spending
party leaks their private Monero key part. Because all keys are aggregates keys, we need to ensure that the refund
and lapse transactions are negotiated and signed before Alice publishes the Tari UTXO. This will allow either Alice or Bob to
claim the refund and lapse transactions, respectively, without the other party being online. 

### TariScript

The Script used for the Tari UTXO is as follows:
``` TariScript,ignore
   CheckHeight(height_1)
   LtZero
   IFTHEN
      PushPubkey(K_{Ss})
   Else
      CheckHeight(height_2)
      LtZero
      IFTHEN
         PushPubkey(K_{Sr})
      Else
         PushPubkey(K_{Sl})
      ENDIF
   ENDIF
```

Before `height_1`, Bob can claim the Tari UTXO if Alice gives him the correct signature to complete the transaction.
After `height_1` but before `height_2`, Alice can claim the Tari UTXO. After `height_2,` Bob can claim the Tari UTXO.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think we need a short discussion about choosing safe values for height_1 and height_2, similar to the previous comment.

Author: See comments above, they should be the same and only discussed once.

Reviewer 2: Yes, it could just be mentioned here again, i.e. "_... as previously discussed ..._".

$$
\begin{aligned}
b_{Sl} &= b_{Slb} + b_{Slb} \\\\
b_{Sl} - b_{Slb} &= b_{Slb} \\\\
b_{Slb} &= r_{Slb_b} + x_a + e_r(k_{Slb} + k_i) \\\\
b_{Slb} - b_{Slb}' &= r_{Slb_b} + x_b + e_r(k_{Slb} + k_i) -(r_{Slb_b} +  e_r(k_{Slb}+k_i))\\\\
b_{Slb} - b_{Slb}' &= x_b \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{24}
$$

## Notation

Where possible, the "usual" notation is used to denote terms commonly found in cryptocurrency literature. Lower case 
characters are used as private keys, while uppercase characters are used as public keys. New terms introduced here are 
assigned greek lowercase letters in most cases. Some terms used here are noted down in [TariScript]. 

| Name                        | Symbol                | Definition |
|:----------------------------|-----------------------| -----------|
| subscript s                 | \\( _s \\)            | The swap transaction |
| subscript r                 | \\( _r \\)            | The refund transaction |
| subscript l                 | \\( _l \\)            | The lapse transaction |
| subscript a                 | \\( _a \\)            | Belongs to Alice |
| subscript b                 | \\( _b \\)            | Belongs to Bob |

> | Monero key                  | \\( X \\)             | Alice's partial  Monero public key  on Ristretto |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Monero key                  | \\( X \\)             | Aggregate Monero public key  on Ristretto |
```

| Alice's Monero key          | \\( X_a \\)           | Alice's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto |
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( X_b \\)           | Bob's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto   |

> | Monero key                  | \\( Xm \\)            | Alice's partial  Monero public key  on ed25519 |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Monero key                  | \\( Xm \\)            | Aggregate Monero public key  on ed25519 |
```

| Alice's Monero key          | \\( Xm_a \\)          | Alice's partial  Monero public key on ed25519 |
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( Xm_b \\)          | Bob's partial  Monero public key on ed25519   |
| Script key                  | \\( K_s \\)           | The [script key] of the utxo |
| Alice's Script key          | \\( K_sa \\)          | Alice's partial [script key]  |
| Bob's Script key            | \\( K_sb \\)          | Bob's partial [script key]  |

> | Alice's adaptor signature   | \\( b'_{Sa} \\)       | Alice's adaptor signature for the signature \\( b_{Sa} \\) of the script_signature of the utxo |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Alice's adaptor signature   | \\( b'_{Sa} \\)       | Alice's adaptor signature for the \\( b_{Sa} \\) portion of the UTXO script_signature |
```

> | Bob's adaptor signature     | \\( b'_{Sb} \\)       | Bob's adaptor signature for the \\( b_{Sb} \\) of the script_signature of the utxo |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Bob's adaptor signature     | \\( b'_{Sb} \\)       | Bob's adaptor signature for the \\( b_{Sb} \\) portion of the UTXO script_signature |
```

That leaves us with the scenario where Alice disappears after Bob posts the Monero transaction, in which case we need to 
protect Bob. After the second lock height, only Bob can claim the Tari; we call this the lapse transaction. The lapse 
transaction will reveal Bob's Monero key so that if Alice reappears, she can claim the Monero.

The image below details the time flow of the Tari transactions spending the Tari UTXO. 
![swap flow](assets/TXR_XMR_flow.png)

## Heights and other considerations

It should be noted that when looking at the two lock heights, the first lock height should be sufficiently large enough
to give ample time for Alice to post the Tari UTXO transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations,
and for Bob to post the Monero transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations. The second lock
height should give ample time for Alice after the first lock height to re-claim her Tari. Larger heights here might make
refunds slower, but it should be safer in giving more time to finalize this. 

Allowing both to claim the Tari after the second lock height is, on face value, a safer option. This can be done by enabling

> either party can claim the script with the lapse transaction. The counterparty can then claim the Monero, however, this

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
either party to claim the script with the lapse transaction. The counterparty can then claim the Monero, however, this
```

their lapse transaction and the transaction to claim the Monero, both with sufficiently high fees. Base nodes will 
prefer to mine transactions with the higher fees, and thus the counterparty can walk away with both the Tari and the 
Monero.

## Key construction

Using [multi-signatures](https://reyify.com/blog/flipping-the-scriptless-script-on-schnorr) with Schnorr signatures, we
need to ensure that the keys are constructed so that key cancellation attacks are not possible. To do this, we create new
keys from the chosen public keys \\(K_a'\\) and \\(K_b'\\)

$$
\begin{aligned}
K_a &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_a' } * K_a' \\\\
k_a &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_a' } * k_a' \\\\
K_b &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_b' } * K_b' \\\\
k_b &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_b' } * k_b' \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{1}
$$

## Method 1

### Detail

This method relies purely on TariScript to enforce the exposure of the private Monero aggregate keys. The script forces 
the spending party to supply their Monero private key part as input data to the script, evaluated via the operation 

> `Ed25519Point`. This TariScript operation will reveal part of the aggregated Monero private key publicly but this is still secure:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
`ConvertToEd25519Point`. This TariScript operation will reveal part of the aggregated Monero private key publicly but this is still secure:
```

see [Key security](#key-security).

The simplicity of this method lies therein that the spending party creates all transactions on their 
own. Bob requires a pre-image from Alice to complete the swap transaction; Alice needs to verify that Bob published the 
Monero transaction and that everything is complete as they have agreed. If she is happy, she will provide Bob with the 
pre-image to immediately claim the Tari UTXO.

> ### Key security

Reviewer 3: This section can probably be removed entirely

Reviewer 2: I think it is very informative to show this for a mixed audience, even though it might seem trivial. Many people wonder why it is safe to construct an aggregated public key where their counterparty knows the other portion of the aggregated secret key.

Author: I have made my viewpoints public above that I don't feel this contributes much to the article. We need to make a call about do we keep this or not.

Reviewer 3: Fair enough, we can keep it. Ideally it should just be somewhere else, with a link

The risk of publicly exposing part of the Monero private key is still secure because of how [ECC](https://cryptobook.nakov.com/asymmetric-key-ciphers/elliptic-curve-cryptography-ecc#private-key-public-key-and-the-generator-point-in-ecc) works. We can
add two secret keys together and share the public version of both. And at the same time, we know that no one can calculate
the secret key with just one part.

$$
\begin{aligned}

> (xm_a + xm_b) \cdot M &= xm_a \cdot M + xm_b \cdot M\\\\

Reviewer 3: Can I suggest using G_m instead of M to denote the Monero generator? M seems to suggest that it is a non-standard generator

Reviewer: Pretty sure G is the same for ED25519 and Ristretto

(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot M &= Xm_a + Xm_b \\\\
(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot M &= Xm \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{2}
$$

> We know that \\(Xm\\), \\(Xm_a\\), \\(Xm_b\\) is public. While \\(xm\\), \\(xm_a\\), \\(xm_b\\) are all private.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We know that \\(Xm\\), \\(Xm_a\\), \\(Xm_b\\) are public. While \\(xm\\), \\(xm_a\\), \\(xm_b\\) are all private.
```

[BCP 14](https://tools.ietf.org/html/bcp14) (covering RFC2119 and RFC8174) when, and only when, they appear in all capitals, as
shown here.

## Disclaimer

This document and its content are intended for information purposes only and may be subject to change or update
without notice.

This document may include preliminary concepts that may or may not be in the process of being developed by the Tari
community. The release of this document is intended solely for review and discussion by the community of the
technological merits of the potential system outlined herein.

## Goals

This Request for Comment (RFC) aims to describe how an Atomic swap between Tari and Monero will be created.

## Related Requests for Comment

* [RFC-0201: TariScript](RFC-0201_TariScript.md)
* [RFC-0202: TariScript Opcodes](RFC-0202_TariScriptOpcodes.md)

$$
\newcommand{\script}{\alpha} % utxo script
\newcommand{\input}{ \theta }
\newcommand{\cat}{\Vert}
\newcommand{\so}{\gamma} % script offset
\newcommand{\hash}[1]{\mathrm{H}\bigl({#1}\bigr)}
$$

## Description

Doing atomic swaps with Monero is more complicated and requires a cryptographic dance to complete as Monero does not

> implement any form of HTLC's or the like. This means that when doing an atomic swap with Monero, most of the logic will

Reviewer 4: ```markdown
Tari-Monero atomic swaps are significantly more involved than BTC atomic swaps as Monero does not
implement scripting that allows for any form of HTLCs or similar. 
```

> have to be implemented on the Tari side. Atomic swaps between Monero and bitcoin have been implemented by the [Farcaster  project](https://github.com/farcaster-project/RFCs)

Reviewer 2: Probably Bitcoin should be capitalized throughout.

and the [comit team](https://github.com/comit-network/xmr-btc-swap). Due to the way that TariScript works, we have a few
advantages over the bitcoin script when it comes to [adaptor signatures](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts#adaptor-signatures) as the [script key] was explicitly designed with [scriptless scripts](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts) in mind.

## Method

The primary, happy path outline of a Tari - Monero atomic swap is described here, and more detail will follow. We assume
that Alice wants to trade her XTR for Bob's XMR.

> * Negotiation - Here, both parties negotiate about the values and how the Monero and Tari UTXO's will look

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Negotiation - Both parties negotiate the value and other details of the Monero and Tari UTXO's 
```

> * Commitment - Here, both parties commit to their use of keys, nonces, and transactions

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Commitment - both parties commit to the keys, nonces, inputs and outputs to use for the transaction 
```

> * XTR payment - Here, the XTR payment is made to a special UTXO containing a script

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* XTR payment - Alice makes the XTR payment to a UTXO containing a "special" script described below
```

* XMR Payment - The Monero payment is made to a multiparty [scriptless script](https://tlu.tarilabs.com/cryptography/introduction-to-scriptless-scripts) UTXO.

> * Claim XTR - Here, the XTR is claimed, and in claiming it, the XMR private key is revealed

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Claim XTR - Bob redeems the XTR, and in doing so, reveals the XMR private key to Alice only
```

> * Claim XMR - Here, the XMR is claimed with the revealed key.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Claim XMR - Alice may claim the XMR by using the revealed key.
```
RE _may_: Does she have to spend the XMR UTXO for this to be secure?

Please take note of the notation used in [TariScript] and specifically notation used on the signatures on the [transaction inputs](RFC-0201_TariScript.md#transaction-input-changes) and on the signatures on the [transaction outputs](RFC-0201_TariScript.md#transaction-output-changes),
other notation will be noted in the [Notation](#notation) section.

## TL;DR

The scheme revolves around Alice, who wants to exchange her Tari for Bob's Monero. Because they don't trust each other, 
they have to commit some information to do the exchange. And if something goes wrong here, we want to ensure that we can 
refund both parties either in Monero or Tari.

How this works is that Alice and Bob create a shared output on both chains. The Monero output is a simple aggregate key 
to unlock the UTXO, while multiple keys are needed to unlock the Tari UTXO. An aggregate key locks this Monero UTXO that 
neither Alice nor Bob knows, but they both know half of the key. The current Tari block height determines the unlocking 

> key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
key for the Tari UTXO.
```
It is ambiguous which key is being referred to in this sentence because it comes right after a sentence talking about the Monero key

transaction will reveal Bob's Monero key so that if Alice reappears, she can claim the Monero.

The image below details the time flow of the Tari transactions spending the Tari UTXO. 
![swap flow](assets/TXR_XMR_flow.png)

## Heights, Security, and other considerations

There are a few things we need to consider for this to be secure as there are possible scenarios that can reduce the security
in the atomic swap. 

When looking at the two lock heights, the first lock height should be sufficiently large enough to give ample time for Alice to post the Tari UTXO transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations,
and for Bob to post the Monero transaction and for it to be mined with a safe number of confirmations. The second lock
height should give ample time for Alice after the first lock height to re-claim her Tari. Larger heights here might make
refunds slower, but it should be safer in giving more time to finalize this. 

Allowing both to claim the Tari after the second lock height is, on face value, a safer option. This can be done by enabling

> either party to claim the script with the lapse transaction. The counterparty can then claim the Monero. However, this

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
either party to claim the Tari funds with the lapse transaction. The counterparty can then claim the Monero. However, this
```

the actual Tari transaction has not been mined. But this is true for any HTLC or like script on any blockchain. But in the odd
chance that this does happen whereby the fees are too little and time locks not enough, it should be possible to do a child-pays-for-parent
transaction to bump up the fees on the transaction to get it mined and confirmed.

## Key construction

Using [multi-signatures](https://reyify.com/blog/flipping-the-scriptless-script-on-schnorr) with Schnorr signatures, we
need to ensure that the keys are constructed so that key cancellation attacks are not possible. To do this, we create new
keys from the chosen public keys \\(K_a'\\) and \\(K_b'\\)

$$
\begin{aligned}
K_a &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_a' } * K_a' \\\\
k_a &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_a' } * k_a' \\\\
K_b &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_b' } * K_b' \\\\
k_b &=  \hash{\hash{K_a' \cat K_b'} \cat K_b' } * k_b' \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{1}
$$

> 

Reviewer 2: I think a section here called "**Key equivalence across different elliptic curves**" or the like is warranted, similar to how "**Key construction**" is explained.
This is essentially a Discrete log equivalence (DLEQ) proof and should be mentioned. Reference to the Monero article <https://web.getmonero.org/resources/research-lab/pubs/MRL-0010.pdf> and more general use for example <https://projekter.aau.dk/projekter/files/260345149/Electronic_voting_application_based_on_public_verifiable_secret_sharing.pdf> paragraph 5.3.1 and  <https://crypto.stackexchange.com/questions/60127/key-equivalence-across-different-elliptic-curves> should be made, possible with a very brief one sentence summary about the differences between the two approaches.

## Method 1

### Detail

This method relies purely on TariScript to enforce the exposure of the private Monero aggregate keys. Based on [Point Time Lock Contracts](https://suredbits.com/payment-points-part-1/), the script forces the spending party to supply their Monero

> private key part as input data to the script, evaluated via the operation Ed25519Point. This TariScript operation will

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
private key part as input data to the script, evaluated using the `ToEd25519Point` operation. This TariScript operation will
```

> private key part as input data to the script, evaluated via the operation Ed25519Point. This TariScript operation will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
private key part as input data to the script, evaluated via the operation Curve25519 Point. This TariScript operation will
```

add two secret keys together and share the public version of both. And at the same time, we know that no one can calculate
the secret key with just one part.

$$
\begin{aligned}
(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot G_m &= xm_a \cdot G_m + xm_b \cdot G_m\\\\
(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot G_m &= Xm_a + Xm_b \\\\
(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot G_m &= Xm \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{2}
$$

We know that \\(Xm\\), \\(Xm_a\\), \\(Xm_b\\) are public. While \\(xm\\), \\(xm_a\\), \\(xm_b\\) are all private.

But if we expose \\(xm_b\\), we can try to do the following:
$$
\begin{aligned}
(xm_a + xm_b) \cdot G_m &= Xm_a + Xm_b\\\\
xm_a \cdot G_m &= (Xm_a + Xm_b - xm_b \cdot G_m) \\\\
xm_a \cdot G_m &= Xm_a \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{3}
$$

However, this is the Elliptic-Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem, and there is no easy solution to solve this on current computer
hardware. Thus this is still secure even though we leaked part of the secret key \\(xm\\).

### TariScript

The Script used for the Tari UTXO is as follows:
``` TariScript,ignore

>    ConvertToEd25519Point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ConvertToCurve25519Point
```

comparison purposes, so we keep it as a byte array. 

### Negotiation

Alice and Bob have to negotiate the exchange rate and the amount exchanged in the atomic swap. They also need to decide 
how the two UTXO's will look on the blockchain. To accomplish this, the following needs to be finalized:

* Amount of Tari to swap for the amount of Monero
* Monero public key parts \\(Xm_a\\), \\(Xm_b\\) and its aggregate form \\(Xm\\)
* Tari [script key] parts \\(K_{Sa}\\), \\(K_{Sb}\\) 
* The [TariScript] to be used in the Tari UTXO
* The blinding factor \\(k_i\\) for the Tari UTXO, which can be a Diffie-Hellman between their addresses.

### Key selection

Using (1), we create the Monero keys as they are multi-party aggregate keys.
The Monero key parts for Alice and Bob is constructed as follows:

$$
\begin{aligned}
Xm_a' &= xm_a' \cdot G_m \\\\
Xm_b' &= xm_b' \cdot G_m \\\\
xm_a &=  \hash{\hash{Xm_a' \cat Xm_b'} \cat Xm_a' } * xm_a' \\\\
xm_b &=  \hash{\hash{Xm_a' \cat Xm_b'} \cat Xm_b' } * xm_b' \\\\
Xm_a &=  \hash{\hash{Xm_a' \cat Xm_b'} \cat Xm_a' } * Xm_a' \\\\
Xm_b &=  \hash{\hash{Xm_a' \cat Xm_b'} \cat Xm_b' } * Xm_b' \\\\
xm &= xm_a + xm_b \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{4}
$$

> ### Commitment phase

Reviewer 2: I think it is important to mention here why a DLEQ proof is not needed and how the script (committed to in the input script signature) fulfils that role, especially to prime the audience that expects a DLEQ proof should be present.

This phase allows Alice and Bob to commit to using their keys.

Alice needs to provide Bob with the following:

* Script public key: \\( K_{Sa}\\)
* Monero public key:  \\( Xm_a'\\)

Bob needs to provide Alice with the following:

* Script public key: \\( K_{Sb}\\)
* Monero public key:  \\( Xm_b'\\)

### XTR payment

Alice will construct the Tari UTXO with the correct [script](#tariscript) and publish the containing transaction to the 
blockchain, knowing that she can reclaim her Tari if Bob vanishes or tries to break the agreement. This is done with 
standard Mimblewimble rules and signatures.

### XMR payment

When Bob sees that the Tari UTXO that Alice created is mined on the Tari blockchain with the correct script, Bob can go-ahead 
and publish the Monero transaction containing the Monero UTXO with the aggregate key \\(Xm = Xm_a + Xm_b \\).

### Claim XTR 

When Alice sees that the Monero UTXO that Bob created is mined on the Monero blockchain containing the correct aggregate 
key \\(Xm\\), she can provide Bob with the required `pre_image` to spend the Tari UTXO. She does not have the 

> missing key \\(x_b \\) to claim the Monero yet, but it will be revealed when Bob claims the Tari. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
missing key \\(xm_b \\) to claim the Monero yet, but it will be revealed when Bob claims the Tari. 
```

Bob can now supply the `pre_image` and his Monero private key as transaction input to unlock the script.

### Claim XMR

Alice can now see that Bob spent the Tari UTXO, and by examining the `input_data` required to satisfy the script, she 

> can learn Bob's secret Monero key. Although this private key is now public knowledge, her part of the Monero spend key 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
can learn Bob's secret Monero key. Although this private key \\( xm_b \\) is now public knowledge, her part of the Monero spend key 
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
a_{Sra} &= r_{Sra_a} +  e_s(v_{i}) \\\\
b_{Sra} &= r_{Sra_b} + x_a + e_s(k_{Sra} + k_i) \\\\
e_r &= \hash{ (R_{Sr} + (X_a)) \cat \alpha_i \cat \input_i \cat (K_{Sra} + K_{Srb}) \cat C_i} \\\\
a_{Sr} &= a_{Sra} + a_{Srb} \\\\
b_{Sr} &= b_{Sra} + b_{Srb} \\\\
R_{Sr} &= r_{Sra_a} \cdot H + r_{Sra_b} \cdot G + R_{Srb}\\\\
a_{Mra} &= r_{Mra_a} + e(v_{r}) \\\\
b_{Mra} &= r_{Mra_b} + e(k\_{Ora}+k_r) \\\\
R_{Mra} &= a_{Mra} \cdot H + b_{Mra} \cdot G \\\\
e &= \hash{ (R_{Mra} + R_{Mrb}) \cat \script_s \cat F_s \cat (K_{Ora} + K_{Orb}) \cat C_r} \\\\
R_{Mr} &= R_{Mra} + R_{Mrb} \\\\
\so_{ra} &= k_{Sra} - k_{Ora} \\\\
\so_{r} &= \so_{ra} +\so_{rb} \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{21}
$$

This allows Alice to claim back her Tari, but it also exposes her Monero key \\(x_a\\)
This means if Bob did publish the Monero UTXO, he could calculate \\(X\\) using:
$$
\begin{aligned}
b_{Sr} &= b_{Sra} + b_{Srb} \\\\
b_{Sr} - b_{Sra} &= b_{Sra} \\\\
b_{Sra} &= r_{Sra_b} + x_a + e_r(k_{Sra} + k_i) \\\\
b_{Sra} - b_{Sra}' &= r_{Sra_b} + x_a + e_r(k_{Sra} + k_i) -(r_{Sra_b} +  e_r(k_{Sra}+k_i))\\\\
b_{Sra} - b_{Sra}' &= x_a \\\\
\end{aligned}
\tag{22}
$$

### The lapse transaction

> If something goes wrong and Alice never publishes her refund transition, Bob needs to wait for the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If something goes wrong and Alice never publishes her refund transaction, Bob needs to wait for the
```

characters are used as private keys, while uppercase characters are used as public keys. New terms introduced here are 
assigned greek lowercase letters in most cases. Some terms used here are noted down in [TariScript]. 

| Name                        | Symbol                | Definition |
|:----------------------------|-----------------------| -----------|
| subscript s                 | \\( _s \\)            | The swap transaction |
| subscript r                 | \\( _r \\)            | The refund transaction |
| subscript l                 | \\( _l \\)            | The lapse transaction |
| subscript a                 | \\( _a \\)            | Belongs to Alice |
| subscript b                 | \\( _b \\)            | Belongs to Bob |
| Monero key                  | \\( X \\)             | Aggregate Monero public key on Ristretto |
| Alice's Monero key          | \\( X_a \\)           | Alice's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto |
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( X_b \\)           | Bob's partial  Monero public key on Ristretto   |
| Monero key                  | \\( Xm \\)            | Aggregate Monero public key on ed25519 |

> | Alice's Monero key          | \\( Xm_a \\)          | Alice's partial  Monero public key on ed25519 |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Alice's Monero key          | \\( Xm_a \\)          | Alice's partial  Monero public key on Curve25519 |
```
ed25519 actually refers to an EdDSA signature on Curve25519

Reviewer: this might actually be fine as the key in this case could be considered a signature?

> | Bob's Monero key            | \\( Xm_b \\)          | Bob's partial  Monero public key on ed25519   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Bob's Monero key            | \\( Xm_b \\)          | Bob's partial  Monero public key on Curve25519   |
```
ed25519 actually refers to an EdDSA signature on Curve25519

Reviewer: this might actually be fine as the key in this case could be considered a signature?
